Editorial: Define _response payload_ (#1149)
graphql/graphql-spec: spec/Section 7 -- Response.md

## Response Format

> :: A GraphQL _response_ is either a _response payload_ or a _response stream_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:: A GraphQL _response_ is the returned result of a GraphQL _request_. A
_response_ is either a _response payload_ or a _response stream_.
```

To ensure future changes to the protocol do not break existing services and
clients, the top level _response payload_ must not contain any entries other
than the three described above.

Note: When `errors` is present in the _response payload_, it may be helpful for
it to appear first when serialized to make it more clear when errors are present
in a response payload during debugging.

### Response Stream

:: A GraphQL request returns a _response stream_ when the GraphQL operation is a
subscription and a _request error_ is not raised. A response stream must be a
stream of _response payload_.

### Data

The `data` entry in the _response payload_ will be the result of the execution
of the requested operation. If the operation was a query, this output will be an
object of the query root operation type; if the operation was a mutation, this
output will be an object of the mutation root operation type.

If an error was raised before execution begins, the `data` entry should not be
present in the _response payload_.

If an error was raised during execution that propagated to the operation root,
the `data` entry in the _response payload_ should be `null`.

### Errors

> The `errors` entry in the _response payload is a non-empty list of errors raised
> during the \_request_, where each error is a map of data described by the error
> result format below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `errors` entry in the _response payload_ is a non-empty list of errors
raised during the _request_, where each error is a map of data described by the
error result format below.
```

## Response Format

:: A GraphQL _response_ is the returned result of a GraphQL _request_. A

> _response_ is either a _response payload_ or a _response stream_.

Reviewer 2: This itches me a little bit I expect a `response stream` to be a stream of `responses` but here the definition is a bit circular. We can really define a `response` as being a `response stream` we just went into infinite recursion.

Maybe invert the logic?

```
:: A GraphQL _response_ is the returned result of a GraphQL _request_. A
_response_ is either a _payload response_ or a _streamed response_.
```

Reviewer 2: Alternatively, something like so?

```
:: A GraphQL _response_ is the returned result of a GraphQL _request_. A
_response_ is either a _payload_ or a _payload stream_.
```

Author: @martinbonnin  I like `response payload` over `payload response` or `payload` because I think it extends naturally to the types we need to add for incremental delivery  `InitialResponsePayload`, ` SubsequentResponsePayload` (see top level description: https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1149#issue-2917891993).

I agree that `Response Stream` could perhaps be more clear. Personally I like `Subscription Stream`. The current proposal for incremental delivery does not allow `@defer` and `@stream` in subscriptions, but I imagine we'd like to add that eventually. So this stream may eventually be a stream of more than just `Response Payload`s.

But `Response Stream` is already the established name and this PR is not attempting to change that. Maybe we could continue that discussion as a follow on of this?

Reviewer 2: IMO the naming should be discussed in globality if we want something ultimately consistent (HTTP media types are also a concern). 

Looking back at https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1135/files, it filled a gap in that subscription were not accounted to in the spec. This part was very welcome but I'm having second thoughts about "response stream". 

"response stream" has 2 important drawbacks:

* It can be thought as a "stream of responses" (which it is not).
* It breaks the request/response symmetry. I think it's quite natural that the response is the result of a request. That sentence: "A GraphQL request returns either a _response_ or a _response stream_." should really stop at "A GraphQL request returns a _response_."

I'm a bit wary that adding things incrementally (no pun intended) makes us lose the big picture here.

Reviewer 2: [Example where the spec is currently inconsistent](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/b41339a0fd22fb3ca9a1a6110334a7094f1f7643/spec/Section%206%20--%20Execution.md#L20):

```
Given this information, the result of {ExecuteRequest(schema, document,
operationName, variableValues, initialValue)} produces the response, to be
formatted according to the Response section below.
```

Should we change this to "produces the response **or the response stream**? That feels really weird.

Author: @martinbonnin this PR is addressing your second bullet
> It breaks the request/response symmetry. I think it's quite natural that the response is the result of a request. That sentence: "A GraphQL request returns either a response or a response stream." should really stop at "A GraphQL request returns a response."

We are updating `Response` to mean the thing that a GraphQL request returns, so the sentence `"A GraphQL request returns a response."` is accurate after these changes.

I believe this also fixes the inconsistency you pointed out in the execution section

Reviewer 2: > I believe this also fixes the inconsistency you pointed out in the execution section

Right! So that's taken care of. Thanks!

I`m still holding (for now) that `Response Stream` feels a bit weird but it's not like I have many other alternative propositions so I'll adhere to the majority here.

### Response Payload

:: A GraphQL request returns a _response payload_ when the GraphQL operation is

> a query or mutation. When the GraphQL operation is a subscription, the GraphQL

Reviewer 3: This sentence is no longer accurate. A GraphQL query with incremental delivery no longer returns a response payload.

request returns a _response payload_ if a _request error_ is raised. A response
payload must be a map.

If the request raised any errors, the _response payload_ must contain an entry
with key `errors`. The value of this entry is described in the "Errors" section.
If the request completed without raising any errors, this entry must not be
present.

If the request included execution, the _response payload_ must contain an entry
with key `data`. The value of this entry is described in the "Data" section. If
the request failed before execution, due to a syntax error, missing information,
or validation error, this entry must not be present.

The _response payload_ may also contain an entry with key `extensions`. This
entry, if set, must have a map as its value. This entry is reserved for
implementers to extend the protocol however they see fit, and hence there are no
additional restrictions on its contents.

To ensure future changes to the protocol do not break existing services and
clients, the top level _response payload_ must not contain any entries other
than the three described above.

> Note: When `errors` is present in the _response payload_, it may be helpful for
> it to appear first when serialized to make it more clear when errors are present
> in a response payload during debugging.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note: When `errors` is present in the _response payload_, it may be helpful for
it to appear first when serialized to make it more clear that errors are present.
```

nitpick, I thought the repetition was a bit odd, feel free to ignore

### Response Stream

:: A GraphQL request returns a _response stream_ when the GraphQL operation is a
subscription and a _request error_ is not raised. A response stream must be a
stream of _response payload_.

### Data

The `data` entry in the _response payload_ will be the result of the execution
of the requested operation. If the operation was a query, this output will be an
object of the query root operation type; if the operation was a mutation, this
output will be an object of the mutation root operation type.

If an error was raised before execution begins, the `data` entry should not be
present in the _response payload_.

If an error was raised during execution that propagated to the operation root,

> the `data` entry in the _response payload_ should be `null`.

Reviewer: Note to other reviewers: this line contains a subtle fix to the wording. :+1:
